Right.
So now that we've looked at a lot of the technologies that used in Front-End web development and we've
designed and develop Web sites using a TMLC SS javascript bootstrap Jay queery in order to become a
full stack web developer we now to learn about the back end.
Now what exactly is a full stack developer.
Because this is a term that's brandished about a lot and especially in the context of development jobs.
So according to Linked In these are the hardest jobs for 2018 and squarely on that list is a full stack
developer.
So what exactly is a full stack developer.
Well a full stack basically is just front end development plus back in development.
And once you're familiar with both then it's this flexibility of working with the front and back and
that makes you so much more desirable as a developer.
Up till now we've only been interacting with Front-End technologies we've learnt about HCM elsea SS
and javascript as well as Jay Aquarion Bootstrap which all enable us to design our website and also
allow for user interaction on the client side in the browser for example.
But now what we're going to look at the back end we're going to learn about no Jesus and other technologies
that enable us to interact with databases or have business logic on a server and a whole lot more.
Now what exactly is the back end anyways for some of you out there who are a bit more mature like myself.
Don't worry it's not something that's rude.
Instead it consists of things such as a server which will serve up your files your age the amount of
success and your javascript a database which can store you use a data such as their log ins and passwords
as well as your applications.
So this is where you create your business logic.
You determine how your web applications work.
For example things such as calculating flight prices or making payments that sort of stuff.
So let's look at a real life example let's take a look at the event.
Bright web application.
And it's a web application because it doesn't just display information.
It also has functionality on the backend that enables it to do something concrete such as find events
or allow you to book events.
So let's say we've gone to event bright and we look at all the events that are happening today and I
find something that is the Hogarth beer and music festival.
Well that sounds right up my alley.
So let's go ahead and register and book a ticket.
So here I enter my name and I buy a ticket.
Well now that information that consists of my name how many tickets I bought and my registration details
such as my e-mail gets saved on the Web site's databases.
And for simplicity's sake you can just imagine these databases as these giant Excel spreadsheets living
somewhere and all of my data that I enter gets saved onto these spreadsheets.
And that means that when I come back at a later date I'm able to look back on to event bright and it
will be able to retrieve it from its database.
All of the data that is associated with my account.
So for example it could retrieve my ticket to the Hogarth beer and music festival now a really great
analogy for a full stack web application it's kind of like a restaurant.
So there is a front of house.
This is the main restaurant where your clients will sit down and have dinner.
But then there's also the kitchen right which is where the cooking is mostly happening.
And finally there's also the larder which is where you store all of your ingredients and everything
you need to make the food.
In this analogy or FRONT OF HOUSE restaurant is basically the client side.
This is what the user sees in the browser.
They're able to interact with the web site using javascript and they're able to see the information
that's being displayed using ational and CSSA.
Now a little bit further back on the back end we've got the kitchen and this is analogous to our server.
This is basically the place where all of our dishes get served from.
So when a restaurant goer ask for a Philly steak then that order gets sent to the server and the server
should send back what it is that the client wanted which is the actual steak.
And finally the larder where all the ingredients are stored is of course the database.
This is where all of our user data or event data are ticket data.
All of the data that makes our website work is stored.
So this is where the divide between the front end and the back end happens it's between the front of
the House and the restaurant and the kitchens and larder.
Now just as with restaurants you don't actually have to create everything in the kitchen.
Right.
You could have a restaurant where you make all of the dishes in front of the client and you just do
it on a table you bring all of the ingredients there and you make it right there for them.
Now the downsides in this case is that firstly your secret recipe that's been passed down over generations
from your great grandma to your grandma to your mother to your self.
Well that's kind of exposed right.
Anybody would be able to see what it is that you're doing.
And they would be able to replicate it.
And this is the same from the business logic of your web site.
If you had something that you wanted to keep secret such as your API keys or how you implement your
particular application then you don't want that to be visible every time somebody loads up a Web site.
Brian and the other problem is that it can be really really time consuming to make the dish in front
of the client in the restaurant because you would have to bring all of the ingredients.
You would have to make it one by one in small batches and in websites that translates to a long loading
time.
So if you are transporting a lot of code over to the browser where it has to be executed on the browser
it usually takes a lot longer than if it was done on the backend.
So the alternative is we take our ingredients from our database so our server interacts with the database
then we execute some code on our server and we create the application or the dish.
In this case which then gets served to the client side.
So that means we don't have to transport any of the ingredients.
We don't have to transport a lot of code which will vastly speed up your website and also keep your
business logic hidden on the back.
And there's a lot of technologies that are commonly used for this purpose and these include ph P ruby
java no Jirus amongst many many others.
Now in addition there are frameworks such as cake BHP or Ruby on Rails or spring Express and these are
things that will speed up development using the particular back in technology you chose.
So a common one you would have heard is maybe Ruby and Ruby on Rails and the main job these frameworks
is to simply reduce the amount of repetitive stuff that a developer has to do.
And just like how you don't want to write the email boilerplate code out every single time you create
an additional page.
Then in the same way a lot of these frameworks such as Ruby on Rails or express they make a developer's
life much much easier by cutting down some of the grunt work and saving you a lot of time in the coming
lessons were going to be delving deep into a lot of this kind of stuff.
And we're going to be learning about no just as well as the most common framework that's used with it
which is express and the best part of all is that we don't have to learn a brand new programming language
and do it because no geus runs on Javascript.
And this is why I know Jeff is one of the most popular back in languages currently because it runs on
Javascript.
So for all of that and more on notice I'll see you on the next lesson.